Add delegated prover tutorial (#47)
0xMiden/miden-tutorials: docs/src/rust-client/delegated_proving_tutorial.md

# Delegated Proving

_Using delegated proving to minimize transaction proving times on computationally constrained devices_

## Overview

In this tutorial we will cover how to use delegated proving with the Miden Rust client to minimize the time it takes to generate a valid transaction proof.

## Prerequisites

This tutorial assumes you have basic familiarity with the Miden Rust client.

## What we'll cover

- Explaining what "delegated proving" is and its pros and cons
- How to use delegated proving with the Rust client

## What is Delegated Proving?

Before diving into our code example, let's clarify what in the world "delegated proving" actually is.

Delegated proving is the process of outsourcing a part of the ZK proof generation of your transaction to a third party. For certain computationally constrained devices such as mobile phones and web browser environments, generating ZK proofs might take too long to ensure an acceptable user experience. Devices that do not have the computational resources to generate Miden proofs in under 1-2 seconds can use delegated proving to provide a more responsive user experience.

> _How does it work?_ When a user choses to use delegated proving, they send off a portion of the zk proof of their transaction to a dedicated server. This dedicated server generates the remainder of the ZK proof of the transaction and submits it to the network. Submitting a transaction with delegated proving is trustless, meaning if the delegated prover is malicious, the could not compromise the security of the account that is submitting a transaction to be processed by the delegated prover. The only downside of using delegated proving is that it reduces the privacy of the account that uses delegated proving, because the delegated prover would have knowledge of the transaction that is being proven.

Reviewer: nit: I think there is a type in "meaning if the delegated prover is malicious, **the** could not compromise the security ..."

Reviewer: I didn't check, but what does that mean? "they send off a portion of the zk proof of their transaction to a dedicated server." 

What do we send? It should be the full zk proof that is generated on the server, or am I mistaken?

## Step 1: Initialize your repository

Create a new Rust repository for your Miden project and navigate to it with the following command:

```bash
cargo new miden-delegated-proving-app
cd miden-delegated-proving-app
```

Add the following dependencies to your `Cargo.toml` file:

```toml
[dependencies]
miden-client = { version = "0.8.1", features = ["testing", "concurrent", "tonic", "sqlite"] }
miden-lib = { version = "0.8", default-features = false }
miden-objects = { version = "0.8", default-features = false }
miden-crypto = { version = "0.14.0", features = ["executable"] }
miden-assembly = "0.14.0"
rand = { version = "0.9" }
serde = { version = "1", features = ["derive"] }
serde_json = { version = "1.0", features = ["raw_value"] }
tokio = { version = "1.40", features = ["rt-multi-thread", "net", "macros"] }
rand_chacha = "0.9.0"
miden-client-tools = "0.1.1"

```

## Step 2: Initialize the client and delegated prover endpoint and construct transactions

> Similarly to previous tutorials, we must instantiate the client.

Reviewer: This sentence seems out of place? 

```
We construct a `RemoteTransactionProver` that points to our delegated-proving service running at http://0.0.0.0:8082.
```

You use this in your code 

```rust
let remote_tx_prover: RemoteTransactionProver =
        RemoteTransactionProver::new("https://tx-prover.testnet.miden.io");
 ```

> We construct a `RemoteTransactionProver` that points to our delegated-proving service running at http://0.0.0.0:8082.

Reviewer: Can you say in two sentences what you do in this tutorial? Create 10 P2ID notes and prove remotely or so

    let endpoint = Endpoint::testnet();
    let mut client = instantiate_client(endpoint, None).await.unwrap();

    let keystore: FilesystemKeyStore<rand::prelude::StdRng> =
        FilesystemKeyStore::new("./keystore".into()).unwrap();

    let remote_tx_prover: RemoteTransactionProver =
        RemoteTransactionProver::new("https://tx-prover.testnet.miden.io");
    let tx_prover: Arc<dyn TransactionProver + 'static> = Arc::new(remote_tx_prover);

    let sync_summary = client.sync_state().await.unwrap();
    println!("Latest block: {}", sync_summary.block_num);

    let (alice_account, _) = create_basic_account(&mut client, keystore.clone())
        .await
        .unwrap();
    let (bob_account, _) = create_basic_account(&mut client, keystore.clone())
        .await
        .unwrap();

    let faucet = create_basic_faucet(&mut client, keystore).await.unwrap();

    let _ = mint_from_faucet_for_account(&mut client, &alice_account, &faucet, 1000, None)
        .await
        .unwrap();

    let account = client
        .get_account(alice_account.id())
        .await
        .unwrap()
        .unwrap();

    println!(

>         "Alice Account balance: {:?}",

Reviewer: Can you say "initial account balance" or account balance before?

Author: Fixed!

## Overview

In this tutorial we will cover how to use delegated proving with the Miden Rust client to minimize the time it takes to generate a valid transaction proof. In the code below, we will create an account, mint tokens from a faucet, then send the tokens to another account using delegated proving.

## Prerequisites

This tutorial assumes you have basic familiarity with the Miden Rust client.

## What we'll cover

- Explaining what "delegated proving" is and its pros and cons
- How to use delegated proving with the Rust client

## What is Delegated Proving?

Before diving into our code example, let's clarify what "delegated proving" means.

Delegated proving is the process of outsourcing a part of the ZK proof generation of your transaction to a third party. For certain computationally constrained devices such as mobile phones and web browser environments, generating ZK proofs might take too long to ensure an acceptable user experience. Devices that do not have the computational resources to generate Miden proofs in under 1-2 seconds can use delegated proving to provide a more responsive user experience.

> _How does it work?_ When a user choses to use delegated proving, they send off a portion of the zk proof of their transaction to a dedicated server. This dedicated server generates the remainder of the ZK proof of the transaction and submits it to the network. Submitting a transaction with delegated proving is trustless, meaning if the delegated prover is malicious, they could not compromise the security of the account that is submitting a transaction to be processed by the delegated prover.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
_How does it work?_ When a user choses to use delegated proving, they send off their locally executed transaction to a dedicated server. This dedicated server generates the ZK proof for the executed transaction and sends the proof back to the user. Proving a transaction with delegated proving is trustless, meaning if the delegated prover is malicious, they could not compromise the security of the account that is submitting a transaction to be processed by the delegated prover.
```

- I know mostly the APIs, not necessarily the exact real-world deployments, so take this with a grain of salt.
- But transaction proving is basically split into execution and proving. With delegated proving, the execution is still done locally but the prover actually re-executes the transaction in order to generate the trace from which the proof is generated. I guess that level of detail is not necessary, so the above is my suggestion.
- I don't think the delegated prover submits the transaction to the network, that should still be done by the end-user. I guess this is also a trust thing: While delegated proving is cryptographically trustless, I cannot be certain that the prover actually submitted the transaction to the network, so this should still be done by the user's device.
